[Music]
are you ready for your head to spin no
not like that girl in the Exorcist she's
too scary anyway
Sciences hottest topic is you well your
brain that is it's really what makes you
you your brain is an amazing thing
it's the body's control system it tells
the body what to do right down to
telling your heart to keep beating but
guess what we don't even use our whole
brain well not all the time anyways
scientists especially neurologists
doctors who study the brain love talking
about brain function
strangely enough so does Hollywood the
question of how much of our brain we use
is a popular theme in movies and TV
shows - like in and my head I'd be
scratching well my thoughts are busy
hatching if I only had a brain our brain
does a whole lot for us but what would
happen if we used our entire brain
capacity and why does this question seem
to come up everywhere across so many
fields of study it's discussed in
medicine education in pop culture what's
all the excitement about well let's get
to our answer by starting with a new
question how much of our brains do we
actually use and no it's not the popular
10% myth that was debunked by numerous
studies and neurologist Barry Gordon in
Scientific American the 10% myth has
been given way too much credit in films
and other media
so most people started believing it was
true it turns out that most of our brain
is active most of the time but not all
parts may be working 100% at the same
time this is true even when we're
sleeping because we're most likely
dreaming right even dreaming takes a lot
of brain activity the exact percentage
we're using is different from person to
person -
so we can't calculate the precise
percentage but you probably use every
part of your brain everyday just not all
at once so let's just take a look at the
basic parts of the brain and their
functions there are three main large
parts the cerebrum cerebellum and the
brain stem in addition to our physical
functions like walking playing sports or
blinking blinking well yeah our brain
controls functions that we don't even
think about like our heartbeat keeping
our blood pumping our lungs allowing us
to breathe and our digestive system
working so that we get nutrients from
food on top of all that our brains also
allow us to have thoughts to feel
emotions and to have memories plus your
brain can store all the information we
gather by using our five senses sight
smell touch tasting and hearing this is
why you can remember a taste like
grandma's apple pie whoa YUM most of the
higher functions like those concerning
emotions and processing which our five
senses pick up take place in the
cerebrum
it's the largest part of your brain and
contains your left brain and right brain
this part of the brain also fine-tunes
complex movement so that you can dance
ballet swim or dribble a basketball the
cerebellum handles our larger
coordination skills so that we can walk
sit stand adjust our posture and balance
this part of the brain also controls
speech so that we can talk to each other
and understand what's being said to us
for example the cerebellum is working
really hard for a toddler who's just
learning to walk and talk it also allows
us to learn new movement and
coordination the brainstem is at the
base of the brain and attached to our
spinal cord without it we couldn't move
at all it also controls our swallowing
our heart rate and our breathing
the brainstem is also what tells us that
we're sleepy or that it's time to be
awake who talked about multitasking
so where does this brain capacity
question come in remember we use most of
our brain all the time but not every
part all the time
sleep is a good example of this concept
and we'll keep it basic when you're
sleeping you're using your brain stem
which allows you to fall asleep and stay
asleep and probably most of your
cerebrum so that you can dream but you
probably aren't using a whole lot of
your cerebellum because you aren't
talking or moving much when you're
sleeping unless you're a sleepwalker but
that's another video what if we used
100% of these functions 100% of the time
would we be able to move objects and
hear people's thoughts like in the
movies sorry but no for one thing we
would get really tired using all your
brain at the same time would require
just about all of the blood circulation
you have the body would actually go into
survival mode from the resulting lack of
oxygen different organs would start to
shut down in priority order secondly
running a brain that's using 100%
capacity would be so powerful that it
would require all the energy we've got
in other words we would be hungry all
the time anyway our stomachs might not
be able to keep up with all the
digestion the constant eating would
require that sounds like a bad tummy
ache
a brain using full capacity would also
mean that our neurons would be firing
all the time in other words we would be
processing sight smell touch taste and
sound at a super high speed which means
we'd be processing and analyzing
information constantly doing all of this
at the same time might make our
judgement a little cloudy we've evolved
to the exact point that we're supposed
to be we're body and brain are balanced
so however you want to look at it if we
used one
100% brain capacity our brains would be
too powerful for our bodies to handle
using 100% capacity of our brains just
isn't in the cards for us right now
not physically mentally or
scientifically there's just no
evolutionary purpose sorry if that was a
bit of a letdown but who knows what our
scientific or evolutionary future holds
because our brains and our bodies work
in sync we can push them both
simultaneously to our very highest
potential
why don't improve your body start a
workout routine and give your body a
healthy diet wanna stretch your brain do
jigsaw puzzles step up your reading game
play Sudoku whatever challenges you some
think that humans just aren't living up
to their full potential but that's
simply not true
if we weren't we wouldn't have our
amazing progress in science and
technology we wouldn't have the medical
capabilities that we do either it's
because the brain's capacity for
learning is a different story how much
we can learn in a lifetime is not
limited by our brain storage capacity
while this too is an infinite our
learning capacity is limited more by
things like attention span getting poor
sleep and whether we met certain age
milestones or for me whether I lose my
marbles entirely or just one at a time
but this is perhaps another topic for
another day when it comes to our brains
and our bodies we get what we give or
lose so how about you do you know of any
brain myths or interesting facts about
the brain if so let me know in the
comments down below and if this video
really gave your brain a workout give it
a like and share with a friend but don't
go away just yet we have over 2000 brain
worthy videos for you to soak up just
click on the left or right stay on the
bright side of life